# A Conversation between MB and PB

## PB: 2025.02.26

Trying this some more. Though it feels weird knowing that it can't be part of the "true" repo in the sense of the thing managed by Git. The other option (which I'm actually trying a bit for this exhibition project for AMAZE this year with Csongor Baranyai [here](https://github.com/csongorb/growingstuff/blob/main/process/dialogue.md).

To which end, do we want to have some kind of dialogue.md or similar in the thesis repo where we can have slower-but-documented exchanges?

Differently, I'm revisiting Chogue with Jonathan at the moment for a book chapter and for that we mostly discussed stuff via email (pre-Discord!!) and I then pasted it into a document that went into the repo: https://github.com/pippinbarr/chogue/wiki/Correspondence)

Actually that was via a Wiki and you can, I think, work with that wiki as a (separate) repo, so that's another potential option to documenting the process elements of the proposal/thesis writing I guesssssss. Or literally write the thesis in the wiki and then the main repo is just there to hold an series of PDFs as "releases" of the thesis, hehe.

Hmmm ANYWAY all of this is precursor to:

I guess the next obvious step is to take this proposed chapter breakdown and add one or two sentences to each beat trying to characterize one layer deeper?

## MB: 2025.02.26

Moving your comments from the [original issues location](https://github.com/mouseandthebillionaire/planetVelocityMap/issues/2) and pasting here in full. This is getting meta and I like it. I agree that this format seems more suited to the MDMing of the thesis? And since the conversation should be a ping-pong type occurence, feels pretty easy to add you as a contributor to the repo so that you can post directly in the file? Doesn't do the direct line by line referencing that a google doc would (nor allow you to proactively clean up my otherwise messy prose), but I think the benefits outweigh this.

So onto the task at hand:

Yes, I will work on fleshing out the chapter breakdowns and go more in-depth about what will be happening in each of those sections. It's going to be fun to think about.

## PB: 2025.02.27

Yeah it may suffice? At least for early days it's not really about line-level commentary anyway, and quoting would probably work fine for a bunch of stuff. We shall see if it gets unweildy. I am only writing this to prove I can sync commit and push to this repo. I can.

## MB: 2025.03.01

You can and did!

## PB: 2025.03.24 (Email)

Well in this brave and more calm new world I guess things hopefully feel less fraught and impossible!

And that said, I guess sticking with something roughly weekly is smart too n'est-ce pas? Want to target Friday? I'm in for my full-time meeting 11:00-12:30 so could meet for lunch after that if that makes sense on your end? Do lunch meetings secretly not advance things though? Too much pleasant and fun chit chat not enough working through stuff? Perhaps the goal of having something written to talk about it smart... Like if I can read something wed/thur and then we talk about it at a meeting that may help. (I'm also a pro at marking up docs too of course)

I also ran into this thing called [Etherpad](https://etherpad.org/) while away which is an interesting Google Docs replacement. I'm wondering if it would synch into a repo at all.

The Rotterdam folks at WdKA were super into local open-source solutions to everything, they also have Discord-like called Zulip running. Kind of appealing.

## MB: 2025.03.24 (Email)

Yes yes yes!

A weekly meeting sounds great, and I’m down for lunch (but happy to move to a less “pleasant” format if that better suits the desired outcome… Haha) I will shoot to have something for you to read by Wed/Thurs, and will plan on keeping on that schedule from here on out.

Will check out etherpad today and see what I can do!